My father, Andrei Petrovich Grinev, served under Count Minich in his youth and retired as a prime major in 17... year. Since then, he lived in his Simbirsk village, where he married Avdotya Vasilyevna Yu., the daughter of a poor local nobleman. We were nine children. All my brothers and sisters died in infancy.
My mother was still fat with me, when I was already enlisted in the Semenovsky regiment as a sergeant, by the grace of the major of the Guards, Prince V., a close relative of ours. If, above all expectations, my mother had given birth to a daughter, my father would have announced the death of the missing sergeant, and that would have been the end of the matter. I was supposed to be on vacation until the end of my studies. At that time, we were brought up in a different way. From the age of five, I was given into the hands of stepbrother Savelyich, who was given to me as an uncle for sober behavior. Under his supervision, I learned Russian literacy in the twelfth year and could very sensibly judge the properties of a greyhound dog. At that time, my father hired a Frenchman for me, Monsieur Beaupre, who was discharged from Moscow along with a year's supply of wine and oil of Provence. Savelyich did not like his arrival very much. "Thank God," he grumbled to himself, "it seems that the child has been washed, combed, and fed. Where do you need to spend extra money and hire a mousier, as if your own people were gone!"
Beaupre was a hairdresser in his homeland, then a soldier in Prussia, then he came to Russia pour etre outchitel1, not really understanding the meaning of this word. He was a kind-hearted fellow, but frivolous and dissolute to the extreme. His main weakness was his passion for the fair sex; he often received thrusts for his tenderness, which made him groan for days on end. Besides, he was not (as he put it) an enemy of the bottle, i.e. (speaking in Russian) he liked to drink too much. But since wine was served only at dinner, and then by the glass, and the teachers usually brought it around, my Beaupre very soon got used to Russian tincture and even began to prefer it to the wines of his homeland, as it was not an example of more useful for the stomach. We hit it off immediately, and although he was contractually obligated to teach me French, German, and all the sciences, he chose to learn how to chatter in Russian from me as quickly as possible, and then each of us went about our business. We lived soul to soul. I didn't want another mentor. But soon fate separated us, and that's what happened.:
The laundress Palashka, a fat and pockmarked girl, and the crooked cowgirl Akulka somehow agreed at one time to throw themselves at their mother's feet, blaming themselves for criminal weakness and complaining with tears about mousier, who seduced their inexperience. My mother didn't like to joke about it and complained to my father. His punishment was short. He immediately demanded the Frenchman's channel. They reported that Mousier was giving me his lesson. My father went to my room. At that time, Beaupre was sleeping on the bed in the sleep of innocence. I was busy. It is necessary to know that a geographical map was written out for me from Moscow. It hung on the wall without any use and had long tempted me with the breadth and goodness of the paper. I decided to make snakes out of it, and taking advantage of Beaupre's sleep, I set to work. My father came in at the very time when I was fixing a washcloth tail to the Cape of Good Hope. When my father saw my geography exercises, he pulled my ear, then ran up to Beaupre, woke him up very carelessly and began to shower him with reproaches. Beaupre, in his confusion, wanted to get up and could not: the unfortunate Frenchman was dead drunk. Seven troubles, one answer. The priest lifted him out of bed by the collar, pushed him out of the door, and on the same day chased him out of the courtyard, to Savelyich's indescribable joy. That was the end of my upbringing.
I lived as a teenager, chasing pigeons and playing leapfrog with the yard boys. Meanwhile, I was sixteen years old. Then my fate changed.
One autumn, my mother was making honey jam in the living room, and I was licking my lips and looking at the boiling foam. The priest at the window was reading the Court calendar, which he received annually. This book always had a strong influence on him: he never reread it without special interest, and reading it always produced in him an amazing excitement of bile. His mother, who knew all his customs by heart, always tried to shove the unfortunate book as far away as possible, and thus the Court calendar sometimes did not catch his eye for whole months. But when he found it by chance, he sometimes wouldn't let it out of his hands for hours at a time. So the priest read the Court Calendar, occasionally shrugging his shoulders and repeating in a low voice: "Lieutenant General!.. He was a sergeant in my company!.. Knight of both Russian orders!.. How long have we been..." Finally, the priest threw the calendar on the sofa and fell into a reverie that did not bode well.
Suddenly he turned to his mother: "Avdotya Vasilyevna, how old is Petrusha?"
—Oh, my seventeenth year has passed,— replied my mother. "Petrusha was born the very year Aunt Nastasya Garasimovna became ill, and when else...
"Welcome," the priest interrupted, "it's time for him to serve. It's enough for him to run around girls' houses and climb dovecotes."
The thought of parting from me so startled my mother that she dropped the spoon into the saucepan, and tears flowed down her face. On the contrary, it is difficult to describe my admiration. The thought of service merged in me with thoughts of freedom and the pleasures of Petersburg life. I imagined myself as an officer of the Guard, which, in my opinion, was the height of human well-being.
My father did not like to change his intentions or delay their fulfillment. The day of my departure was set. The day before, my father announced that he intended to write with me to my future boss, and demanded a pen and paper.
"Don't forget, Andrey Petrovich," said my mother, "to bow to Prince B. from me, too; I hope, they say, that he will not leave Petrusha with his favors."
"What nonsense!  My father answered, frowning. "Why on earth would I write to Prince B.?
" But you said you were going to write to Petrusha's boss?
"Well, what about it?"
— Why, Petrushin's boss is Prince B. After all, Petrusha is enrolled in the Semenovsky regiment.
— Recorded! What do I care if it's recorded? Petrusha will not go to Petersburg. What will he learn while serving in St. Petersburg? Hanging around and having fun? No, let him serve in the army, let him pull a strap, let him smell gunpowder, let him be a soldier, not a chamaton. Enlisted in the guard! Where's his passport? Hand it over here.
My mother found my passport, which was kept in her box along with the shirt in which I was baptized, and handed it to my father with a trembling hand. The priest read it with attention, put it on the table in front of him and began his letter.
I was tormented by curiosity: where am they sending me, if not to Petersburg? I kept my eyes on Batyushkin's pen, which was moving rather slowly. Finally, he finished, sealed the letter in the same package with his passport, took off his glasses, and, beckoning me over, said: "Here is a letter for you to Andrey Karlovich R., my old comrade and friend. You're going to Orenburg to serve under his command."
So, all my bright hopes were dashed! Instead of a cheerful Petersburg life, boredom awaited me in a remote and remote area. The service, which I thought about with such delight for a minute, seemed to me a grave misfortune. But there was nothing to argue about. The next morning, a traveling wagon was brought to the porch; a suitcase, a cellar with tea utensils, and bundles of rolls and pies, the last signs of domestic pampering, were packed into it. My parents blessed me. My father said to me, "Goodbye, Peter. Serve faithfully whom you swear to; obey your superiors; do not chase their affection; do not ask for service; do not dissuade yourself from service; and remember the proverb: take care of your dress from the beginning, and honor from your youth." My mother, in tears, told me to take care of my health, and Savelyich to look after the child. They put a rabbit sheepskin coat on me, and a fox fur coat on top. I got into the caravan with Savelyich and set off on the road, shedding tears.
